docs/gen3schemadev/first_dictionary.md, before:

# Creating your first gen3 data dictionary

A data model is a blueprint that defines the structure and format for organising data. The two primary types are relational and graph models.

### Relational Model
In a relational model, data is organised into tables.
*   **Tables**, also called **entities**, represent concepts like `disease`, `patient`, `sample`, etc.
*   **Columns**, also called **attributes**, define the details of an entity, such as `patient_id`, `bp_systolic`, etc.
*   **Relationships** are rules that link different tables together. e.g `patient` has a relationship with `disease` through the `disease_id` column.

### Graph Model
A graph model, which is used by Gen3, organises data using nodes and links.
*   **Nodes** are used to represent entities.
*   **Links**, or edges, represent the relationships that connect nodes.
*   **Properties** are key-value pairs that store descriptive details about nodes and links.

### Terminology Comparison

| Concept | Relational Model Term | Graph Model Term |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Represents an object | Entity (Table) | Node |
| Describes the object | Attribute (Column) | Property |
| Connects objects | Relationship | Link (Edge) |


**Importantly: Gen3 uses a graph model to represent the data model.**

--


Gen3SchemaDev provides a high level input_yaml file where you can define the major components of your data model. This input_yaml file abstracts away some of the complexity and formatting needed for creating gen3 schemas. 


# Nodes
An node represents a table of data in the data model. nodes encapsulate related information, for example, information about the patient, the sample, sequencing run, output files, etc. When data is submitted to the data model, each table of metadata will correspond to a specific node. 

The example below shows the nodes `program`, `project`, `subject`, `acknowledgement`, `publication`, and `core_metadata_collection`.


![node_example](node_example.png)

# Properties
Properties are found within nodes. Properties can be thought of as the columns in a table. Each properties will have the property name (column name), a description of what the property is, and a data type. 

## Data types
| Data Type  | Description                                      | Example Value         |
|------------|--------------------------------------------------|----------------------|
| string     | Textual data                                     | "sample123"          |
| integer    | Whole numbers                                    | 42                   |
| number     | Numeric values (integer or floating point)        | 3.14                 |
| boolean    | True or false values                             | true                 |
| object     | Key-value pairs (dictionary/map)                  | {"age": 30}          |
| array      | Ordered list of values                           | [1, 2, 3]            |
| null       | Null value (no value)                            | null                 |

*These are the standard [JSON Schema data types](https://json-schema.org/understanding-json-schema/reference/type.html) used to define the kind of data a property can hold.*
  

## Enums
In a `property`, a specific data type called an enumeration (`enum`) can be used to specify a set of allowed values, like a controlled vocabulary. `Enums` are an `array` data type, where each value in the array is an allowed value. 

For example, a property that specifies the experiment type could be defined as: `['RNAseq', 'ChIPseq', 'LC-WGS', 'WES', 'WGS']`.


# Links
Links are used to connect nodes together. Links are directional, always connecting a child node up to its parent. 

Importantly, links have a `multiplicity`, which can be one of: 
- `one_to_one`
- `one_to_many`
- `many_to_one`
- `many_to_many`

## Example:

The example below shows some properties from the `medical_history` node. Notice how the first column is the property name, the second column is the data type, the third whether the property is required or not, and the fourth is the description.

![prop_example](prop_example.png)

- Some properties, like `atrial_fibrillation`, can only accept a specific set of values. In this case, the only allowed values are `yes` or `no`. This is an example of a controlled vocabulary, which we define using an `enum`.

---

### Example 1
> Use case: "Each patient may have multiple blood samples taken, but information about mortality will always be one record per patient."

How would we define these links?

First, lets define the `nodes`:
- `patient`
- `blood_sample`
- `mortality`

Then, lets define the `links`:
- `patient` -> `one_to_many` -> `blood_sample`
- `blood_sample` -> `one_to_one` -> `mortality`

---

### Example 2
> Use case: "Multiple samples are loaded into a mass spectrometry machine each run, which produces a batch of mass spectrometry data files. However, all the data files from every mass spectrometry run are analysed with a single lipidomics workflow."

Lets define the `nodes`:
- `sample`
- `mass_spectrometry_run`
- `mass_spectrometry_data_file`
- `lipidomics_workflow`

Then, lets define the `links`:
- `sample` -> `many_to_one` -> `mass_spectrometry_run`
- `mass_spectrometry_run` -> `one_to_many` -> `mass_spectrometry_data_file`
- `mass_spectrometry_data_file` -> `many_to_one` -> `lipidomics_workflow`

---

# Lets make a Gen3 Data Dictionary!
- Follow this guide on how to use Gen3SchemaDev to create your first dictionary: [Creating your first dictionary](..//gen3schemadev/first_dictionary.md)

Commit message:

Revise first dictionary documentation to enhance clarity and structure
- Updated the introduction to emphasize the graph model used by Gen3, replacing references to relational models.
- Clarified terminology related to Gen3 schemas, data dictionaries, and bundled schemas for better user understanding.
- Added a new section on the `input_yaml` file, detailing its role in defining data model components.
- Improved organization of content to facilitate navigation and comprehension for users creating their first Gen3 data dictionary.

docs/gen3schemadev/first_dictionary.md, after:

# Creating your first gen3 data dictionary

Gen3 uses a graph model to represent the data model. A graph model is a collection of nodes and links. Nodes represent entities, and links represent relationships between entities.

A single node in the gen3 graph model can be represented as a single yaml file called a `Gen3 Schema` which is in the jsonschema draft-04 format.

Therefore the gen3 data model can be represented as a either a collection of yaml files (schemas) or a single json file (bundled schema).

For the purpose of this guide we will use the following terminology:
- [`Gen3 Schema`](../../tests/gen3_schema/examples/yaml/lipidomics_file.yaml): A single yaml or json file that defines a single node in the data model. [Learn More](schemas.md)
- [`Gen3 Data Dictionary`](../../tests/gen3_schema/examples/yaml/): A folder containing multiple yaml files for each node in the data model.
- [`Gen3 Bundled Schema`](../../tests/gen3_schema/examples/json/schema_dev.json): A json file containing a list of jsonschemas for each entity in the data model.

--

## Gen3 `input_yaml` file

Gen3SchemaDev provides a high level `input_yaml` file where you can define the major components of your data model. This `input_yaml` file abstracts away some of the complexity and formatting needed for creating gen3 schemas. 

In this file you can define the major components of your data model, including:
- `nodes`
- `links`
- `properties`

This guide will walk you through how to create the gen3 data dictionary using the `input_yaml` file.

## Nodes
An node represents a table of data in the data model. nodes encapsulate related information, for example, information about the patient, the sample, sequencing run, output files, etc. When data is submitted to the data model, each table of metadata will correspond to a specific node. 

The example below shows the nodes `program`, `project`, `subject`, `acknowledgement`, `publication`, and `core_metadata_collection`.


![node_example](node_example.png)

# Properties
Properties are found within nodes. Properties can be thought of as the columns in a table. Each properties will have the property name (column name), a description of what the property is, and a data type. 

## Data types
| Data Type  | Description                                      | Example Value         |
|------------|--------------------------------------------------|----------------------|
| string     | Textual data                                     | "sample123"          |
| integer    | Whole numbers                                    | 42                   |
| number     | Numeric values (integer or floating point)        | 3.14                 |
| boolean    | True or false values                             | true                 |
| object     | Key-value pairs (dictionary/map)                  | {"age": 30}          |
| array      | Ordered list of values                           | [1, 2, 3]            |
| null       | Null value (no value)                            | null                 |

*These are the standard [JSON Schema data types](https://json-schema.org/understanding-json-schema/reference/type.html) used to define the kind of data a property can hold.*
  

## Enums
In a `property`, a specific data type called an enumeration (`enum`) can be used to specify a set of allowed values, like a controlled vocabulary. `Enums` are an `array` data type, where each value in the array is an allowed value. 

For example, a property that specifies the experiment type could be defined as: `['RNAseq', 'ChIPseq', 'LC-WGS', 'WES', 'WGS']`.


# Links
Links are used to connect nodes together. Links are directional, always connecting a child node up to its parent. 

Importantly, links have a `multiplicity`, which can be one of: 
- `one_to_one`
- `one_to_many`
- `many_to_one`
- `many_to_many`

## Example:

The example below shows some properties from the `medical_history` node. Notice how the first column is the property name, the second column is the data type, the third whether the property is required or not, and the fourth is the description.

![prop_example](prop_example.png)

- Some properties, like `atrial_fibrillation`, can only accept a specific set of values. In this case, the only allowed values are `yes` or `no`. This is an example of a controlled vocabulary, which we define using an `enum`.

---

### Example 1
> Use case: "Each patient may have multiple blood samples taken, but information about mortality will always be one record per patient."

How would we define these links?

First, lets define the `nodes`:
- `patient`
- `blood_sample`
- `mortality`

Then, lets define the `links`:
- `patient` -> `one_to_many` -> `blood_sample`
- `blood_sample` -> `one_to_one` -> `mortality`

---

### Example 2
> Use case: "Multiple samples are loaded into a mass spectrometry machine each run, which produces a batch of mass spectrometry data files. However, all the data files from every mass spectrometry run are analysed with a single lipidomics workflow."

Lets define the `nodes`:
- `sample`
- `mass_spectrometry_run`
- `mass_spectrometry_data_file`
- `lipidomics_workflow`

Then, lets define the `links`:
- `sample` -> `many_to_one` -> `mass_spectrometry_run`
- `mass_spectrometry_run` -> `one_to_many` -> `mass_spectrometry_data_file`
- `mass_spectrometry_data_file` -> `many_to_one` -> `lipidomics_workflow`

---

# Lets make a Gen3 Data Dictionary!
- Follow this guide on how to use Gen3SchemaDev to create your first dictionary: [Creating your first dictionary](..//gen3schemadev/first_dictionary.md)
