Readme.md, before:

# Developing a Gen3 Data Dictionary

This document provides core concepts on data modelling as well as documentation on data modelling specifically in gen3. 

This document is broken up into the following parts:
- [Developing a Gen3 Data Dictionary]
  - [Data Modelling Core Concepts](#data-modelling-core-concepts)
  - [Using Gen3SchemaDev as a data modelling tool](#using-gen3schemadev-as-a-data-modelling-tool)
  - [Deep dive into Gen3 Data Modelling](#deep-dive-into-gen3-data-modelling)


## Data Modelling Core Concepts
- [Entities](#data-modelling-core-concepts)
- [Properties](#data-modelling-core-concepts)
- [Links](#data-modelling-core-concepts)
- [Enums](#data-modelling-core-concepts)


## Using Gen3SchemaDev as a data modelling tool
- [Installation](docs/setup.md)
- [Creating your first schema](docs/gen3schemadev/example_usage_future.md)


## Deep dive into Gen3 Data Modelling
*Special Thanks to Marion Shadbolt for providing the [source material](https://github.com/AustralianBioCommons/umccr-dictionary/tree/main/docs/schemas)*
1. [Gen3 Schema Explained](docs/gen3_data_modelling/schemas.md)
   1. [Dictionary Structure](docs/gen3_data_modelling/dictionary_structure.md)
   2. [Descriptors](docs/gen3_data_modelling/descriptors.md)
   3. [Links](docs/gen3_data_modelling/links.md)
   4. [Properties](docs/gen3_data_modelling/properties.md)
2. [Example of a Gen3 Schema yaml](docs/gen3_data_modelling/explainer_schema.yaml)
3. [Handy tips](docs/gen3_data_modelling/handy_tips.md)

Commit message:

Update README.md to clarify the purpose of the repository and improve section formatting for better navigation. The introduction now emphasizes the goal of providing documentation, learning materials, and tools for Gen3 data modeling.

Readme.md, after:

# Developing a Gen3 Data Dictionary

This repository aims to provide the documentation, learning materia, and software tools to facilitate the creation of a data model in Gen3.

This document is broken up into the following parts:
- Developing a Gen3 Data Dictionary:
  - [Data Modelling Core Concepts](#data-modelling-core-concepts)
  - [Using Gen3SchemaDev as a data modelling tool](#using-gen3schemadev-as-a-data-modelling-tool)
  - [Deep dive into Gen3 Data Modelling](#deep-dive-into-gen3-data-modelling)


## Data Modelling Core Concepts
- [Entities](#data-modelling-core-concepts)
- [Properties](#data-modelling-core-concepts)
- [Links](#data-modelling-core-concepts)
- [Enums](#data-modelling-core-concepts)


## Using Gen3SchemaDev as a data modelling tool
- [Installation](docs/setup.md)
- [Creating your first schema](docs/gen3schemadev/example_usage_future.md)


## Deep dive into Gen3 Data Modelling
*Special Thanks to Marion Shadbolt for providing the [source material](https://github.com/AustralianBioCommons/umccr-dictionary/tree/main/docs/schemas)*
1. [Gen3 Schema Explained](docs/gen3_data_modelling/schemas.md)
   1. [Dictionary Structure](docs/gen3_data_modelling/dictionary_structure.md)
   2. [Descriptors](docs/gen3_data_modelling/descriptors.md)
   3. [Links](docs/gen3_data_modelling/links.md)
   4. [Properties](docs/gen3_data_modelling/properties.md)
2. [Example of a Gen3 Schema yaml](docs/gen3_data_modelling/explainer_schema.yaml)
3. [Handy tips](docs/gen3_data_modelling/handy_tips.md)
